wine is a mocker strong drink is a
brawler and whoever is that astray by it
is not wise the wrath of a king is like
the roaring of a lion
whoever provokes him to anger sins
against his life it is honorable for a
man to stop striving since any fool can
start a quarrel the lazy man will not
plow because of winter he will beg
during harvest and have nothing counsel
in the heart of man is like deep water
but a man of understanding will draw it
out most men will proclaim each his own
goodness
but who can find a faithful man the
righteous man walks in his integrity his
children are blessed after him a king
who sits on the throne of judgment
scatters all evil with his eyes who can
say I have made my heart clean I am pure
from my sin diverse weights and diverse
measures they are both alike an
abomination to the Lord even a child is
known by his deeds whether what he does
is pure andhrite the hearing ear and the
seeing eye the Lord has made them both
do not love sleep less you come to
poverty open your eyes and you will be
satisfied with bread it is good for
nothing cries the buyer but when he has
gone his way then he boasts there is
gold and a multitude of rubies but the
lips of knowledge are a precious jewel
take the garment of one who is surety
for a stranger and hold it as a pledge
when it is for a seductress bread gained
by deceit is sweet to a man but
afterward his mouth will be filled with
gravel plans are established by counsel
but wise counsel wage war he who goes
about as a tail bearer reveal secrets
therefore do not associate with one who
flatters with his lips whoever curses
his father or his mother his lamp will
be put out in deep darkness an
inheritance gained hastily at the
beginning will not be blessed at the end
do not say I will recompense evil wait
for the Lord and He will save you
diverse weights are an abomination to
the Lord and dishonest scales are not
good a man steps are of the law
how then can a man understand his own
way it is a snare for a man to devote
rashly something as holy and afterward
to reconsider his vows a wise King
sifts out the wicked and brings the
threshing wheel over them the spirit of
a man is the lamp of the Lord searching
all the inner depths of his heart mercy
and truth preserved the king and by
loving-kindness he upholds his throne
the glory of young men is their strength
and the splendor of old men is their
gray head blows that hurt cleanse away
evil as to stripes the inner depths of
the heart